# Hacking Minecraft

## Chapter 0x00 - Introduction

### motivation

First things first: this is hacking, not modding, and this is hacking, not cracking.

Modding Minecraft is a lot of fun, holds a lot of potential, and there is a robust community of Minecraft modders, offering a veritable universe of possibilities for programming challenges and fun game play.  I've done a little bit of modding m'self, and as you will see soon, the decompiled sources maintained by MCP / Forge are a key resource in my pursuit of Minecraft hacking.  The distinction I make, however, is that by "hacking" in this blog series I mean (1) directly modifying the Minecraft engine, without the benefit (nor the drawbacks!) of a mod hooking mechanism, and (2) working directly in Java bytecode.  Though later in this series I employ Java source-to-bytecode compilation to ease one of the steps, it comes back to tinkering with the classfile bytecode to implement the changes.

And, by "hacking", I am using the older, original sense of "hacking", meaning tinkering to improve or adapt for suitability to a particular purpose.  Those of us who use "hacking" in this sense refer to computer break-ins, vandalism, privicy invasion, and other cyberattacks as "cracking".  It's an uphill battle, though, since most news and other media outlets use the word "hacking" for these kinds of neferious activities.  But, at the same time, the web is full of blogs and vlogs on how to "hack your life" or "hack your food".  Certainly, these uses of the term don't mean anything nefarious.  Computer hacking used to be the same way; the quintessential example would be the [Homebrew Computer Club](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homebrew_Computer_Club).  So, in the spirit of computer pioneers who turned early relatively closed computer hardware and software into useful and helpful tools to make life better in both small and large ways, I offer this blog on hacking Minecraft.

Will this make life better for you?  My purpose in hacking Minecraft is manifold:  First, and primarily, it is a simple and straight-forward extrapolation of the primary draw of Minecraft -- invention, open-endedness, and exploration -- applied to the Minecraft game itself.  Very meta.  Second, it proved to be a perfect context for learning in much greater technical detail about how Java works.  I've been programming in Java for a while, and knew in generic ways about how the JVM works, but picking through the class file format, reading bytecode, and seeing in concrete terms how the parts of a compiled Java class interact deepened my knowledge and understanding.  This has been much better than textbook learning, because Minecraft is a real-world, non-trivial Java application.  Thirdly, this has certainly been about making Minecraft more fun.  I find Minecraft to be immensely fun, and I would play it even if I could not hack in my own personal improvments ...  but it is even more enjoyable for me with the tweaks I've introduced.  So my overall hope is that this blog does in fact make your life better -- by providing an enjoyable programming project, by deepening your software engineering skills, and by making Minecraft itself more fun -- in whatever way would add fun for you.

Note that I said "more fun" -- not "easier".  Yes, some of my hacks definitely make getting by in the game easier.  But my crops hack for example makes life for my Minecraft avatar harder.  She (yes, I play as Alex) has to pay much closer attention to the growth cycle of wheat, and both carrots and potatoes are much harder to grow bountifully, because the stages of growth are not as distinct as wheat's.  But this makes the game more fun for her!  ... I mean me!  I play to manage well a growing domain of territory.  I've no interest in slaying the Ender Dragon, nor even visiting the End.  I built a Nether portal so I could gather quartz so that I can eventually craft redstone components.  But I am focused on the Overworld, and am out mostly in the daytime, dealing with mobs only when caught out at night, to mop up after spending all night crafting, or to slay some Endermen for Ender pearls (you'll see why in Chapter 0x0b!).  So I encourage you to apply the hacks of mine that will make gameplay more satisfying for you personally, and to invent hacks of your own that will appeal to your sense of satisfying gameplay.


### audience

This blog series is aimed a programmers / developers / software engineers who know a high-level language (such as C, C++, C#, Java, Perl, PHP, Python, Go, etc.) well, and are intrigued by lower-level software functionality.  The target language is Java, but I predict that anyone who knows, say, any three modern, widely-used programming languages would be able to read the Java code in this series.  I also anticipate that while the actual opcodes will be different, the concepts and a fair bit of the detail I cover regarding Java bytecode would translate to the bytecode of other CORA languages, and the opcodes of compiled and interpreted languages.

At times I go into more detail than perhaps a seasoned programmer really needs.  At those times I am "thinking out loud".  My aim is that by stepping through my own thought process, it helps illuminate the path, even though many readers will be well-equipped with their own torch.  I do aim for this blog series to be useful even for those who are well-versed in high-level programming, but for whom what happens after clicking a 'build' button at Heroku is a bit of a mystery.

And, in many ways, I am part of my own audience.  (Hopefully a negligible fraction, tho ...)  I'm writing this blog series partly to formalize and solidify my understanding of what I explored while doing it.  I've been programming for 25 years, but I'm certainly not an expert in this particular area.  I would welcome constructive feedback from anyone who can clarify things that I inadvertantly confuse, add detail or insight in places where I unknowningly skim, or provide corrections where I make mistakes.


### some cautions

I make particular note that in order to do this hacking, I had to remove Mojang's signature from the Minecraft engine jarfile.  The pristine engine is provided as a signed jarfile, and as a jar, unpacking it is trivial.  Putting it back together after changing it, however, is not impossible I suppose, but computationally infeasible.  The jar contains meta-information that includes the SHA1 hash of each component file.  It's easy enough to recompute those after modifying a classfile or an asset, but then you've changed the SHA1 hash of the meta-information itself.  With that change, the signature on the jarfile no longer fits, and to compute a new one, well, you'd need Mojang's private key.  So.  To put the jar file back together, I simply removed the signature.  This lets it go back together, but no longer as a valid, Mojang-certified game engine.  As a result, I play offline only.  (And I keep a backup of the whole Minecraft directory, in case I accidentally launch it while on-line, and it downloads "updates").

(And by "off-line", I don't simply mean single-player mode; I mean with no network connection.  The Minecraft launcher itself will look for updates, indicated by checksum mismatches.  So before launching Minecraft, unplug your network cable, turn off WiFi, or whatever.)

Finally, a common-sense caution that perhaps goes without saying: make backups before you begin, and at sensible stages along the way.  That's only prudent, and lets you hack fearlessly, as you will be able to revert to a known-good state if things go haywire.


### next chapter

Proceed to [Chapter 0x01 -- Tools and Methods](/hexcraft/blog/chapter-01-tools-and-methods.html) to get an overview and to set up your workbench-- er, crafting table.
